Let's now look at a particular model for
realizing lexicalized PCFGs, and the model
we're going to look at is the model of
Eugene Charniak from Charniak 1997.
This isn't the most recent model.
But I'm choosing it because
it's the simplest and
most straightforward way of
building a lexicalized PCFG and
so hopefully it's easy for
you guys to get a sense of how it works.
So just to give a bit of context for
what I'm explaining, when you're actually
parsing in Charniak's parsing model, the
way he's doing the pausing is bottom up
in a way somewhat similar to the way that
we did CKY pausing you know in OS Sigma.
Just as with the plain vanilla PCFG, the
probabilistic condition is top-down, so
you've got the probability of a Right
hand side given a left hand side,
ie the probability of the stuff
below given the stuff above.
And in this segment I'm basically going
to just show you what the probability
distribution are, rather than actually
going through the pausing algorithm.
But for the actual pausing algorithm,
you are using these probabilities and
applying them,
working upwards through the tree.
So this is the idea of how
Charniak's algorithm works, and for
this example, what i'm going to assume
is that this is our starting point,
where we're already partway
through building a tree.
So we have an s node and
we know the head word of the whole
sentence is going to be rose.
And that sentence is rewriting as
a noun phrase and a verb phrase.
Well, since the the third phrase
is the head of the sentence,
we just know automatically that it's
head word is also going to be rose.
And the point at which we're
up to is we haven't yet
decided how to expand this noun phrase and
we don't know what the head
of this noun phrase is.
So, in Charniak's model, there are two
probability distributions that are used
to expand out the sentence and
we'll see each of them in turn so
the first one is gee, we have to choose
some head word for this noun phrase.
And for choosing that head word, we're
going to condition on several things.
We're going to condition on
the head word of the pair end,
the category which is now N phrase and
the parent category which here is S and
so the probability distribution
we are going to use is this one.
So we're going to have a probability
of different hide word choices
Given the three conditioning things.
The category, the parent category,
and the parent head word.
And so what we are asking is for
a noun phrase which
is in this context of
being under an S node and
having head of the whole S P rose,
what are likely nouns to choose
as the head of the noun phrase.
And so you might think of something
like the balloon rose and say balloon.
Or temperature, temperature rose.
Or you might think tempos or
something like this.
But since actually here we're
dealing with a financial newspaper,
the Wall Street Journal,
what it's actually likely to be, and
is in this example, is that profits rose.
Okay, so
now we have this noun phrase here.
Here, which is a noun phrase,
headed by profits, but
we don't actually know how it expands.
And so now we're going to have a second
probability distribution at work.
And so we're going to want to have
a rewrite rule that's working out
How this expands, and what we're going to
condition it on is a head word, profits,
the category, noun phrase, and
the parent category, which is S.
And so that's then going to give us this
second probability distribution here.
What is the probability of a role that
expands this down one level in the tree
given these three conditioning things?
The category, the parent category.
And the head word.
Okay so, we're going to chose a rule.
And so that rule could be
just NP goes to a plural
noun, and it would have some probability,
or it could be something else.
And so for this example here the actual
rule that's chosen is to generate
an adjective and a plural noun.
And so
that's given by this probability here.
Well once we've generated an adjective and
a plural noun, we then have
the notion of a head of a phrase so
we know deterministically that if this
is a noun phrase headed by profits
well this plural noun must be profits
because it is the head of the noun phrase.
And since, actually, we're down to
the level of a part of speech tag here,
that means we have the word profits
at the bottom of the tree here.
Okay, at this point we've completed
this element of the expansion according
to these two probability distortions.
And at that point,
we're just going to keep on going.
So we're going to say
well here is a category.
It's actually a non-terminal category.
But we're going to expand that by
working out what its headword is so
we're going to use this
probability distribution.
And we're going to choose a word
here is the head word corporate.
And then by that point,
because we're down to a nonterminal, we'll
know that that's a word in the sentence.
And then over here,
the VP headed by rose It's
going to have to be expanded by making
use of this probability distribution.
So we're going to expand that and
choose some expansion
phrase maybe it will go through a past
tense verb and a prepositional phrase.
And then we'll start expanding those
down by choosing head words and
how to expand them.
We'll get the rows here
automatically again of course,
which will then go to the word rose.
And set out, then we'll choose a head word
over here and then start expanding it.
So we're pretty much done.
So the only thing we really need now
Is a way to get started, and so for
that we just need a slightly variant
probability distribution at the beginning.
So that we're going to say that we
have a root category at the top, and
it needs a headword.
So at that point, we're going to
have a probability of a headword
given that the category equals root and
then the other things, these don't exist.
So this is just the chance of different
words being the head of the whole
sentence.
And so then, once we've done that, we can
then start expanding downwards from there.
So this will be a ROOT headed by rose and
then we look for
a rule to expand that that.
So we're now looking for some expansion
but, you're here to B to S under this.
So, at this point we again, don't yet
have a parent category but,
we've now got a category and
the head so, you need a couple of special
probability distributions to just get you
started at the beginning and then, you do
the basic precaution I've talked out here.
So what can we achieve by putting these
words into the grammar like this.
So here are some
statistics that show this,
that go in a bit more detail
what I talked about previously.
So here we have different
expansions of the verb phrase rule.
And here we have a choice of
different verbs for a head.
And this just illustrates
more systematically
how the chance of different expansions for
the verb phrase vary enormously
depending on which verb you're choosing.
So, if you have a verb like come,
you find out that getting a PP after
the verb is enormously, enormously common,
it happens about one third of the time.
And having just the verb in the verb
phrase happens about 10% of the time.
Where many other kinds of compliments,
like S and
NP compliments are really
rare with the verb calm.
But that's then exactly and
also trend with a noun phrase after it.
But for
other verbs the facts are very different.
So for the verb take,
take normally takes an object.
He took a nap, he took a walk,
he took a ticket and a thing like that.
So about a third of the time
you get just VP goes to VNP.
Of course you can get other things
as well If we then move on to think,
think is a sentential comment verb
that you're saying what you thought.
And in fact, nearly always the think
almost three quarters the time
you're getting an S bar complement,
that's something like he thinks that she
is dishonest, he thinks she is dishonest.
Either of those is an S bar complement,
regardless whether there's an over that or
not.
And then the final example
illustrated here is the verb want,
which also takes complements but
it takes infinitive S compliments.
I want to go to the store.
And so about 70% of the time,
you get that.
And so, essentially,
you notice that they're just extremely
different probabilities of different
expansions of the verb phrase, dependent
on knowing what the head verb is.
And this is precisely
the kind of information
that can be captured in
the lexicalized policing model.
And the one other final
thing to note here is that
these are what are sometimes referred
to as monolexical probabilities so
we're looking at
the expansion of categories,
in terms of the categories and knowing
just one lexical item, the head verb.
That's in slight contrast
to the other main way
in which lexicalized PCFGs are useful,
and that's for
predicting dependencies in things
like prepositional phrases.
So, there we have bilexical probabilities.
So, that was when we had examples
like go, into, or man, with.
We're then deciding how likely the
connection is between a preposition and
then a noun and a verb.
So these then involve two words at a time.
So the model also has
bilexical probabilities.
So here are the chances of choosing
the head noun of a noun phrase.
A plural noun phrase, given some amount of
information which might include
information about the noun phrase.
But also information about what
its parent category is and
what the head word of
the whole sentence is.
And so
what you find in the Wall Street Journal,
this isn't typical of all English,
is that if you have a plural noun,
a bit over one percent
of the time is prices.
But if you know that it's
it's inside a noun phrase under an s node,
ie it's the subject of the sentence.
Well then the chances of it
being prices become about 2.5%.
But what really makes a big difference
is that if you know that the verb is
fell, well that's information that
tells you it's the kind of verb that
could easily go with prices and so then
the probability becomes far higher again,
so now it's up to almost a 15% chance,
a one in seven chance that the head of
the noun phrase is going to be prices.
And again, we're capturing a lot more
of this probabilistic information.
But you might be wondering now g can we
really estimate this probabilities and
the answer is that in general you
can't estimate this probabilities
that the probabilities that
you'd like to estimate but
come far too sparse and
I'll illustrate that on the next slide.
But the way that it's dealt
with in Charniak's model
is by having a complicated scheme
of doing linear interpolation
between different models that are more or
less precise.
So this should be reminiscent
of what you saw for
language models in the second
week of the class.
So we want to estimate this probability
distribution that we've seen before,
choosing a headword based
on the parent's headword,
current category and
the parent's category.
And the way you are doing that is by
taking this linear interpolation of
a bunch of different distributions
that one of which is just the maximum
likelihood estimation conditioning on
everything, and then there are further
distributions that, first of all,
leave out what the parent headword is, and
then also Leave out even
the parent category.
So at this point you're just choosing
a headword based on the category.
And so just saying it's a noun phrase,
what's the chance of it
having a certain head?
And in Charniak's model these
different distributions
are weighted in a deterministic way,
depending on how much you'd expect to
have seen certain kinds of evidence.
So, making use of these language
modeling like techniques are central
to build these kind of lexicalized PCFGs,
because the data just is too sparse.
And this next slide shows that.
So here,
the different distributions are being
combined together in
the linear interpolation.
So if we do the one on the right first,
what we find out is that if
You've got a noun phrase
headed by profits, and
inside it there's an adjective and you're
wanting to ask what adjective it is in
the Wall Street Journal, one quarter
of the time, it's corporate profits.
Okay so that's a very precise,
fully conditioned estimate
whereas when you start erasing
some of the information,
you get parsa but
still non zero estimates.
I haven't actually mentioned
this second line here.
This was a method that Charniak used to
get poor semantic classes to try and keep
some information about the parent headward
before getting rid of it entirely, but
if we just look, again, don't really deal
with that one and look at these two.
You can see that once you're only
conditioning on knowing it's a noun phrase
under an s, or just a noun phrase,
the chance of it being corporate is then
dropping by almost two
orders of magnitude.
So you're down to about half a percent.
Okay, so this is the good case
in which you can calculate
a probability from the rich
conditioning and it helps you a lot.
But quite commonly that
just doesn't work for you.
So if you then say well,
the verb of the sentence is rose and I've
got a subject noun phrase, a noun phrase
under an S and what noun should it be?
Well in the particular sentence in
the data to be passed
the actual noun was profits.
But it turns out that in
the training data profits never
occurred as the noun hitting
a noun phrase as the subject
goes despite the fact that
that sounds perfectly normal.
Profits rose last quarter profits
rose throughout the economy,
any sentence like that.
And so this, the maximum likelihood
estimate, the MLE here, is just zero,
and so the only way we get a nonzero
probability estimate is by using these
probabilities where we
condition by less stuff.
And even then,
we're getting these probabilities, right?
So the probability of a noun
being profits in a noun phrase.
It's about sort of 120th of a percent.
But that's the best kind
of estimate that we have.
And so although you'd like to use rich
estimates as here most of the time in
doing lexicon's PCFG pausing, you're
actually having to fall back on rather
cost or estimates because you can't
get the conditioning information you'd
like to from the fairly small supervised
tree banks that we have to train on.
In particular for
these bilexical probabilities when you're
trying to condition on two lexical items,
the probabilities tend
to have to get hacked off just because
the amount of information to estimate.
This is extremely, extremely sparse,
because you're in this space where even
before you consider other categories,
that you're doing something that's kind
of like bigram probability estimates.
And it's hard to estimate
word bigram probabilities
on only about a million words of text.
And that's all the text that we have
in the hand constructed tree banks.
Okay, there were some details
that needed smoothing.
And the end there, but I hope the main
thing that you could take away from this
segment is how there's a fairly
straightforward system of two probably
distributions that Charniak was able to
use to realize a lexicalized PCFG models.